No Horizon
	They were all just living their usual life when it happened. Dee was at home, sipping on a refreshing ice tea, texting her friend, when she first heard the rumble. Aiko was reading her favorite book again, Maniac Magee, and Fred was on his daily run. It was a classic summer day. None of them had school, and none of them had anything to be concerned about.
	The rumble began quiet, and some citizens didn’t notice it at first, but that was set to change. At some point, the rumble became loud enough for everybody not listening to music to hear, and people realized something was out of the ordinary. Then somebody spotted something on the horizon, and she pointed and yelped, causing others to turn. A dark cloud of foreboding slowly settled on every observer. A there was a massive storm heading towards them. Little did they know, half the news companies on the planet were simultaneously broadcasting the news of the eruption of nuclear war between the United States and Russia. Only a few had the sense to take cover, and the rest didn’t last long.
	Dee got the alert on her phone. She didn’t buy it at first, and thought it was some sort of dumb prank. The sense of danger hit her however, when her room got dark all of he sudden. She peeked out of her window slightly worriedly, and when she saw that the sun and the entire horizon had been blocked out by a giant storm cloud, she ran to the basement as fast as she could. She tore past anything in the way and cowered in the basement waiting. All she could think about were her parents at work.
	While Fred was jogging, he saw the storm cloud over houses as he crossed a raised bridge. He knew immediately that it was no normal storm. He gathered his wits, and climbed down the wall of the river he was crossing and found a maintenance tunnel. It was dark, but he closed the door anyway. He waited, huddled in a corner as he heard the storm get louder and louder. Every once in a while, he felt an insect scuttle across the back of his neck, but he brushed it off, and never gave in to the temptation to open the door and let some light in.
	Aiko had it the hardest. Her TV was left on and she heard what was happening. Her mother had went for a walk, and Aiko knew she had to find her. She dropped her book on the floor and got up. Outside, everyone was frantically trying to find a place to take cover. Aiko was desperate and started running looking for her mom. She kept looking until the very last moment, when she saw her. Her mom was helping an old man who had hurt his ankle. Aiko tried to call out to her, but she couldn’t. She tried to warn her that the storm was here, but she was too far away. Aiko realized she had to run and she turned from her mother. She made it back to her house crying. She didn’t know what would happen to her mom, but she couldn’t change it. She scampered and tripped her way to the basement and prayed with all her heart to anyone that her mom would be alright.
	Finally, the storm hit. It was many times more powerful than anyone expected, and entire houses were effortlessly lifted from their foundations. Everybody could hear things smashing against whatever shelter they had. Dee’s screamed when the remains of a house she had never seen before crushed the caved in the trapdoor of her basement and almost trapped her leg under them. Aiko huddled in the fetal position crying for her mother until she had no tears left. Fred had it the worst though. He was in the corner of the maintenance tunnel when something happened that made him panic instantly. Water was leaking into the maintenance tunnel, and rising fast. He stood up and hoped that it wouldn’t rise fast but before he knew it it was up to his knees. He waited for the water to rise to his chest, and he took a deep breath, and opened the door and jumped into the river.
	It was littered with debris and Fred knew his life was in extreme danger. The river was moving dangerously fast, so Fred dove under the water and tried to find a safe place. Miraculously, it seemed that the storm was ending, and Fred managed to grab a piece of rebar sticking out of the river wall. Just as he almost made it out though, a drifting branch struck his leg and cut it badly. He hauled himself onto the ground and dragged his body under the debris of a fallen house for protection throughout the last remaining bit of the storm.
	Dee was cowering in her basement through the storm, afraid because she didn’t know what was going on outside. Without warning, the debris of some house crashed through the roof of the basement. It barely missed Dee’s foot, causing her to scream and scamper to the other side of the basement. She was fine, but really shaken. Luckily for her, the debris from the house continued to block out dangers from the storm as the roof of the basement had done. Dee waited, even more alert than before, for the storm to end.
	Aiko could hardly think about the danger she was in herself. All she could think about was the danger her mother was in. She huddled with her knees to her chest, too scared to move. She didn’t know what she would do without her mother, so all she could do was wait, with a sense of doom constantly suffocating her.
	After what seemed like ages, but in reality was no more than a half hour, the storm had passed over them, on to cause destruction somewhere else. But the damage in Vintown was done. There was nothing left except the occasional half shell of a factory or some other large building made with concrete or steel. Dee was the first one to exit her shelter. She managed to squeeze herself out of a small hole that formed in the roof of the basement. She winced and quietly cursed as she slightly cut her rib on a rogue piece of metal. Once she was all the way out, she stood up and brushed herself off.
	“Hello?” she said.
	That moment was when Dee first realized the gravity of the situation she was in. Where was everybody? Did they die?
	Dee got slightly dizzy at this thought, so she started wandering. She picked a random direction and got on the move. She hardly realized how cold it was getting. The sky was completely gray and blocking out the sun. Every couple minutes, she would yell “Hello” to see if she got a response. On the fifth one, she heard someone faintly yell “help” after. She instantly started sprinting in the direction she thought was accurate.As she ran, she heard the help cries getting louder and louder. Finally she reached the spot.
	“Help!” someone said, from under the debris of a house.
	“What is it?” Dee said, panting for air.
	“My leg! It’s bleeding a lot!” the person said.
	Dee was instantly worried. She lifted the debris off the person and saw a small pool of blood forming by the side of his leg. She tried her best not to be sick as she leaned down to check his leg.
	“So what’s your name?” she asked the person as she checked the cut.
	“Fred, you?” he said in a strained voice.
	“Call me Dee. Luckily it seems to be a pretty clean wound, how did it happen?” Dee asked.
	“Something hit me in the river,” Fred said, relieved at the status of his wound, but still in a little pain.
	“You mean your were in the river!?” Dee exclaimed. “What on earth were you doing there!?”
	“I was hiding in the maintenance tunnel next to it. It flooded though, so I had no choice. This cut happened on my way out.”
	“Okay, I’m gonna bandage your wound. I’m gonna have to cut a strip of cloth off your shirt, and it’s gonna hurt a lot when I tie it, okay?”
	“All right,” he said. Dee got out a swiss army knife she always kept on her and cut off a strip of cloth from Fred’s sleeve. Then she tied it around his leg. Fred winced in pain as she tightened the knot.
	“Can you stand?” Dee asked?
	“Yeah,” Fred said, as he shakily stood up. It really hurt for him to put any weight on his injured leg, so he found a good stick on the ground and used it as a walking stick.


	“Have you seen anyone else?” Fred asked Dee, worried what her answer could mean.
	“No,” Dee said. “I’ve only just gotten out of my shelter though. I was calling out, but you’re the only person that responded. I hope there’s more people than just us. Maybe some people are still hiding”
	“Yeah...” Fred agreed, but he didn’t have much hope in that. He thought that if nobody had come out by now, nobody else would. “Do you know what happened?”
	Dee still hadn’t come to terms with what happened. “Well, right before the storm started, I got this notification on my phone. It said… that a nuclear war had started between the United States and Russia.”
	“Oh my god...”
	“And that’s not all. I’ve read before that if anything like this ever happened, lots of the world would go into a situation called a ‘nuclear winter.’ Basically what that means is that the ash and soot from nuclear explosions will enter the atmosphere, and if enough powerful explosions go off, it could completely block out the sun for an extended period of time. This would prevent the earth from heating up at all like it normally does and put the whole globe in sub-freezing temperatures.
	“And this doesn’t just mean everybody feels chilly. It means that no crops will be able to grow, so there will be a massive food shortage. Not even animals will be able to live, because everyone knows the base of the food web is the sun. Plants will die, animals that eat plants will die, animals that eat animals will die, and eventually, all food will run out.
	“Things definetely don’t look good for us right now. My phone has no reception whatsoever, but it’s kept track of time. It’s 3 PM right now, but look at how dark it is. It’s the middle of summer, but it’s freezing cold. The effects have already started!”
	Fred knew she was right. He was still wet from his swim, and the weather wasn’t getting any better. He remembered what she said about food. “Does this mean our only chance for food is the stuff that’s already made?”
	“Yep.”
	Fred and Dee each looked around the opposite direction, but the both saw the same thing. A barren wasteland. Most houses were gone, and none had more than half of a house left. Trash from all sorts of places was littered all over the ground. There was nothing of use and nobody that could help in sight.
	“I guess we better go try to find some food.” Fred said.
	“Yeah, I think our best bet will be scavenging what once was downtown. I think if we follow the river… that way, after about a mile we’ll get to some shops.”
	“Well… there’s no time like the present.


				*			*			*


	“Jackpot!” Fred said, as he pulled a shelf that had been knocked over in a food store off of all of it’s contents. Underneath it was plenty of packaged food, that had survived unharmed. There was enough jerky, candy, and cup o’ noodles to last them at least 2 weeks.
	Dee ran up. “Nice!” She looked up at the sky, then pulled out her phone and checked the time. “It’s getting late,” she said. “I think in our current situation this is as good a place to set up camp as any. We should probably try to start a fire to dry you off and keep us warm throughout the night. We can use some of the curtains we found as crappy blankets.”
	They had managed to find a good supply of items in the time they spent. They had enough preserved food to last them several weeks, a couple curtains for cloth for blankets and bandages, a metal pot, some matches and even a little reading material.
	Fred piled up some scrap wood, cleared an area around it and shoved some splinters into the bottom for kindling. Then he got a match and tried to light the fire. It took a couple tries, but in no time at all there was a nice fire going. Both of them struggled to get comfortable under the fire, but it hadn’t been an easy day for either of them and they were both tired enough to get to sleep in no time.


				*			*			*


	It was hard for both of them to get up the next morning. They were stiff from sleeping on the ground and it was still cold. Dee finall got up and groggily threw some wood on the fire spot and flicked a match and threw it under. Then she realized she forgot kindling, cursed quietly and tried again. Soon she had a fire going, and both of them were warming up and chewing on cold jerky.
	“I think we should go back to where we started,” Fred told Dee. “Maybe there are some survivors there, or at least some blankets or something.”
	“Well, I’d rather stay here, and scavenge for more food and stuff. We might be here a lot longer than we have enough to provide for.”
	“All right, I’m gonna start walking along the river in a few minutes.”


	As Fred was walking along the river, he realized how worried he was. Their first night in the new world had made them a lot more uncomfortable about their situation than they had been before. Fred wondered about who else had been affected, or even survived. He realized that he hadn’t given much though about the future. He and Dee couldn’t stay in this place forever, but there was no sign of anybody from the rest of the world and no way to contact anybody.
	He reached where he had originally taken shelter and felt even more disheartened. There was no sign’s of any survivors anywhere, and there weren’t many possible. He started searching random ruins for anything or anybody that could be of help.
	After almost twenty minutes of pulling over random things to see if they had anything under them, Fred had a big surrprise. He struggled to pull over a particularly big piece of plywood, and realized it was covering the entrance to a basement. When he looked inside, he was instantly alert. There was a girl curled up lying on her side, about his age. Her lips were blue.
	“Hello?” Fred said, and the girl didn’t move.
	“Hello?” he said again, louder this time, and the girl stirred. Fred realized that the girl was possibly in danger of hypothermia, and he was jolted into action. He dropped into the basement and picked up the girl. She opened her eyes, but was still too weak to move. Fred pushed her up out of the basement and jumped out after her.
	“Can you speak?” Fred asked her, shaking her slightly. She didn’t respond, so Fred hoisted her up over his shoulder, and started on the journey back to the campsite.


				*			*			*


	“Oh my god!” Dee shouted as she saw Fred stagger into the campsite with a limp body over his shoulder. She jumped up from her spot next to the campfire a ran up to help him. Together they gently lowered her down by the campfire. Fred collapsed next to the campfire himself, exhausted from carrying the girl all the way back. It had taken him until past sunset.
	“What happened?” Dee asked, while checking the girl’s health.
	“I don’t know, I found her asleep in a basement, with no heat at all. She was unconsious when I got there, and stayed that way the whole way home. She hasn’t even spoken a word.”
	“She might have some minor frostbite,” Dee said after a quick checkup, “but if she heats up fast enough, she should be fine. I’ll start heating some water so she can have warm soup once she wakes up.”
	“I’m starving. I’m gonna eat some jerky right now.” Fred said.
	Dee started heating up some water in the pot they had found earlier, and Fred started devouring some jerky, hungry after hauling the girl all the way back. They both sat at the fire wating for her to wake up. Dee got her a blanket and wrapped her up in it. After a few minutes, the girl started moving. Fred and Dee were silent but paying rapt attention.
	The girl sat up in her blanket, bleary eyed. “Can you talk?” Fred asked.
	The girl acted like she didn’t hear for a few seconds, and then shook her head.
	“Can you tell us your name?” Dee asked, but the girl just shook her head. She did look around, and found a charred piece of wood from the fire the night before. She took it and wrote a word on the ground. “Aiko.”
	“Is that your name?” Dee asked, and Aiko nodded, but she was writing something else under her name. “Mute”
	“So you can’t talk? Ever?” Fred asked, confused. Aiko nodded.
	“Well,” Dee said, “I’m sorry about that, and I’m sorry you had to stay in the basement for such a long time. We made you a soup for when you woke up. It should be cooled down enough by now.” She handed Aiko the cup o’ noodles. Aiko took it gratefully and sipped it quickly. She didn’t realize how hungry she was.
	The survivors had a little communication about what wasa going on. Aiko had already heard what had happened from the TV, so there wasn’t much to tell. Dee had gotten some more food from scavenging, and they were all set for at least a month. Not too long later, they all fell asleep by the campfire.


				*			*			*


	Over the next few months, the three survivors went full survival mode. After a couple weeks Fred had constructed a small shed for them to live in, and by a month’s time there they had a sturdy room that could even withstand the strong winds they occasionally faced.
	Aiko found an old radio that was broken, but she fixed it up and soon enough they found one radio station still broadcasting. It was owned by the government and said that rescue facilities creation was underway, but it would take forever due to any organization and communication systems going down, not to mention all the leaders that were now dead. They were doing a sweep of the country, starting with the most populated places, and heading down the list. Vintown would be a little before the middle of that list.
	Dee went on scavenging trips mostly, and found some pretty useful things. The most important thing to them was food, and thanks to all the shops that were nearby, there was no shortage of food. There was a slight lack of vegetable matter though, but there was enough to survive. Dee also knew a lot about first aid and survival from a certain TV show she used to like to watch.
	They were all fine and alive for most of the time. The worst problem they ever had was a few cuts, and boredom. They had a few books, but they ended up reading them over and over again. They started playing games with each other like horseshoes with custom made equipment. It wasn’t the greatest, but anything entertaining worked. They had a decently prosperous settlement until sometime in November (they lost track of the days) when disaster struck.
	Fred and Dee had gone on supply trips, and Aiko was sitting in the shed reading a book, when she heard a man’s voice. She couldn’t make out what he was saying, but when she peeked out of a crack in the wall of the shed, she saw two men that didn’t look like friends.
	One of them was armed with a club, and Aiko could see a pistol holder in the hand of the other one. She silently slipped out of the shed and hid on the wall opposite of them without them seeing her. As they got closer, Aiko could hear what they were saying.
	“— got some food or something. Maybe they’ve even got some coke”
	“I wouldn’t hope too much for that. Look at this crappy shack. They’re lucky to be alive. Let’s see what they got.”
	Aiko skirted around the side to avoid them seeing her as they went to the entrance. She flinched slightly when they kicked open the door.
	“Well, the idiots that built this place aren’t here. With any luck they’re dead. Look at all this food!”
	Aiko heard them tearing open multiple candy wrappers.
	“Ha, look. They’ve even got a radio. I bet they fell for that fake rescue message. The government is full of crap, they can’t save anybody.”
	Aiko heard them smash the radio on the ground, and felt anger rise. She wouldn’t let them destroy all the progress they made in months just like that. She crept around back to the door. Both of them had their backs to her. She got closer silently and suddenly fiercely leaped and latched on to the back of the one holding the pistol, and put him in a choke hold with no mercy.
	Her attempt to stop them was futile, and she knew it but she did it anyway. She had the element of surprise and was on the mans back for several seconds until a blow from the club on her head sent her to the ground reeling. She put her hands in the air over her face to protect herself.
	“What a little bitch.” one of the men said.
	“Did you really think that would work?” the man with the pistol said, pointing it at her head.
	Aiko shook her head, trembling from fear.
	“What were you trying to do!?” the man with the pistol queried forcefully, not knowing Aiko couldn’t respond.
	“Speak, runt!” the man with the club said, kicking her in the side.
	All Aiko could do was curl up and shake her head.
	“I’m done with this.” the man with the pistol said, and shot Aiko in the head.


				*			*			*


	When Fred and Dee got back, they encountered a nightmare scene. Aiko was lying in the shed, with a pool of blood on the floor and a bullet wound in her head. Half their food was gone. They could both figure out what happened a little too easily.
	It was a too sad of a place for them to stay any longer. They packed up the most calories and matches they could in sacks, and left. They tried to calculate the rough direction of the nearest big city and went that way. They scavenged all the food they needed on the go, and lit fires at night to stay warm. If it ever rained, they slept under pieces of wood laid on top of them and beneath them. All they wanted was to get away from the horror they had felt at their old shelter.
	They had been on the move for a month when their heard a sound they hadn’t heard in a long time. The chop of helicopter blades through the air gave them a hope they hadn’t felt in months. They waved their arms in the air and prayed with all their souls that the pilot saw them. Their prayers were answered, and the helicopter started heading towards them.
	When it got closer, they could see that it was a military helicopter. The wind from the rotors tore at their faces as the helicopter touched down. The pilot yelled over the sound of the motor, asking if they were armed. They shook their heads. He nodded telling them to get in.
	There was nobody else in the helicopter other than the pilot. Fred and Dee were extremely grateful they were being rescued, but the thought that was more on their mind was Aiko. They both felt extreme anger at whoever had killed her and wished they could have Aiko in the helicopter right now. It was hard for both of them to accept the truth as unchangeable. However when they saw their destination come into sight they started focusing on other things.


				*			*			*
EPILOGUE


The government had organized only several recovery bases across the country, and every citizen rescued had been recruited to work on vital tasks. In a way, Russia had gotten what something they wanted. What was left of the citizens of the United States became a militaristic communist organization. There was no longer any time for luxuries like holidays, because everybody had a vital job. If there was though, Fred and Dee might have realized they were rescued on Christmas.

