> What prompted you to send this message?

It was really just a gut reaction. I'm not a hugely social person, and
for the most part I avoid using most social media platform aside from
posting the occasional tweet.

I do most of my open source development via various mailing lists,
which I have found to be a bit less prone to the pointlessly toxic
arguments you see on places like Reddit or Twitter.

There's always going to be some disagreement of course, but usually it
was engineering related, where a bunch of people good at something
were arguing about the best way to do that something, and often this
resulted in a resolution everyone accepted. Sure, maybe they weren't
thrilled about the end result, but a bunch of people arguing about a
problem domain they both know well themselves and have some trust
that the people they disagree with know it well too allows for
compromise.

Then of course, something like this happens.

Suddenly, we have people arguing about things where it's clear neither
side trusts the other to have a clue, and to make matters worse, people
on the outside seeing this lack of sanity now start to assumptions about
how *terrible* things must be if there are discussions like this going on.

What tipped me over the edge was the attacking of the people who have
the incredibly difficult job of having to pick who is right in this
mess. Being in a position of authority means you don't always get to
make the calls your gut is telling you to make. More importantly, you
have to be ready to take all the blame when an unpopular decision needs
to be made.

I do agree that problems exist and need to be addressed, but with all
this bickering it just makes it that much harder to even tell what
takes priority.

> Are you against the Linux CoC as it currently stands?

Yes.

> If so, how in your mind could it be improved?

The same way we improve everything else in the kernel: publicly reviewed
patches where even the people who don't attend kernel summits are allowed
to have a say.

For something which is not a CVE (sometimes these aren't discussed
publicly to avoid major security problems on enterprise distros) I
don't see why that context shouldn't be public before the fact.

> Do you think Linux development is a meritocracy? What are your
> thoughts on the idea that this kind of structure works unfairly
> against marginalized people?

I am not of the opinion that meritocracy is a good idea, but regardless, in
my experience kernel development is not a meritocracy. We might be a bit
more sarcastic than most, and sometimes we need to be told we are out of
line, but we do not judge your worth by code quality alone. We are not
robots, and if we see you are being an insensitive prick we WILL call you
out on it and not just shrug it off because you write "good code."

> Have a lot of people reached out to you after you posted that message?

None, you are actually the first, which I was sort of glad about, honestly.
My email thread had no real positive effect and the replies to it (which
were completely unrelated to any part of my email...) just ended up being
tinder for the very crap I was hoping to rally people people against. I
didn't really mind just letting it die.

> Do you think devs will actually rescind their code from Linux?

I don't know. But even if they did, it's not fair to hold that
against them. It's their code and their hard work after all.
